whether you're cramming for an exam or
trying to learn a new musical instrument
or even trying to perfect a new sport
sleep may actually be your secret memory
weapon
studies have actually told us that sleep
is critical for memory in at least three
different ways
first we know that you need sleep before
learning
to actually get your brain ready almost
like a dry sponge
ready to initially soak up new
information and without
sleep the memory circuits within the
brain
effectively become waterlogged as it
were
and we can't absorb new information we
can't
effectively lay down those new memory
traces
but it's not only important that you
sleep before learning
because we also know that you need sleep
after learning to essentially hit the
save button on those new memories
so that we don't forget in fact sleep
will actually
future proof that information within the
brain
cementing those memories into the
architecture
of those neural networks and we've begun
to discover
exactly how sleep achieves this
memory consolidation benefit
the first mechanism is a file
transfer process and here we can speak
about
two different structures within the
brain the first
is called the hippocampus and the
hippocampus sits on the left
and the right side of your brain and you
can think of the hippocampus almost like
the
informational inbox of your brain it's
very good at receiving new memory files
and holding onto them the second
structure that we can speak about
is called the cortex this wrinkled mass
of tissue
that sits on top of your brain and
during deep sleep
there is this file transfer mechanism
think of the hippocampus like
a usb stick and your cortex like the
hard drive
and during the day we're going around
and we're gathering lots of files
but then during deep sleep at night
because of that limited storage capacity
we have to transfer those files from the
hippocampus
over to the hard drive of the brain the
cortex and that's exactly one of the
mechanisms
that deep sleep seems to provide but
there's another mechanism
that we've become aware of that helps
cement
those memories into the brain and it's
called
replay several years ago scientists were
looking at how rats learned as they
would run around a maze
and they were recording the activity in
the memory centers of these rats
and as the rat was running around the
maze different brain cells
would code different parts of the maze
and so if you added a tone to each one
of the brain cells
what you would hear as the rat was
starting to learn the maze
was the signature of that memory so it
would sound
a little bit like
it was this signature of learning that
we could hear
but then they did something clever they
kept listening to the brain
as these rats fell asleep and what they
heard
was remarkable the rat as it was
sleeping
started to replay that same memory
signature
but now it started to replay it almost
10 times
faster than it was doing when it was a
wig
so now instead you would start to hear
that seems to be the second way in which
sleep can actually
strengthen these memories sleep is
actually
replaying and scoring those memories
into a new circuit within the brain
strengthening that memory representation
the final way in which sleep is
beneficial for memory
is integration and association in fact
we're now learning that sleep is
much more intelligent than we ever
imagined sleep doesn't just
simply strengthen individual memories
sleep will actually
cleverly interconnect new memories
together
and as a consequence you can wake up the
next day
with a revised mind wide
web of associations we can come up with
solutions
to previously impenetrable problems
and this is probably the reason that
you've never been told
to stay awake on a problem instead
you're told to sleep on a problem and
that's exactly what the science is
teaching us